Introduction

MODX is a powerful and complex CMS (Content Management System). Actually, the developers like to refer to it as a CMF (Content Management Framework) because you can actually build your own CMS using MODX as a platform.

This article will only scratch the surface of MODX and stick to its CMS aspect. My intention here is to give you a taste of the features of MODX that are most attractive to PHP developers.

MODX Architecture

MODX Revolution is completely based on xPDO (more on that below). A great comfort to PHP developers is the fact that virtually everything in MODX is a well-crafted PHP class of objects.

The documents themselves (called "resources" in MODX) are objects, but so are the templates, users, user groups, categories, resource groups, code snippets, plugins, chunks of reusable HTML, and just about everything else.

All of these object classes are derived from the xPDO class, which means that you can use the xPDO public methods to create, retrieve, modify, save, and delete them. Once you learn the relatively intuitive xPDO methods, you can work with any piece of the web site in your PHP code. This creates endless opportunities to craft dynamic Web pages that are easy to maintain.

The PHP-friendly architecture of MODX means that it is relatively easy to convert external PHP classes for use with MODX. Many contributions by PHP Classes site members are currently in use on MODX sites around the world.

How MODX Works

Although MODX has many powerful features, its basic operation is quite simple. When a browser requests a MODX page, the MODX core determines the template used by the requested page. After it has been determined that the current user has the right to view the page, the MODX parser retrieves the template from the database, replaces any MODX tags in the template, and delivers the page to the browser.

The most attractive result of this simplicity is that it is your template that is delivered to the browser, not MODX's. There are "themes" that you can download for MODX pages, but they are not often used because it is so easy to create your own template.

The template is standard (X)HTML and there are almost no restrictions on what it can contain. The only significant restriction is that templates cannot contain raw PHP code. In MODX, the PHP code is placed in code "snippets." This makes the site more secure since any uploaded file with PHP code in it will not execute. It also enforces the separation of code and content, which makes the site much easier to maintain.

If you need PHP to perform some operation on your page, you just move the code into a snippet and place a snippet tag in the template (or in the page content). The tag will be replaced with the return value of the snippet. If your snippet produces no output for the page, you simply have your snippet return an empty string and the tag will be replaced with nothing.

Snippets automatically have access to the current resource object (the document being displayed) and the current user object (the user viewing the page, if one is logged in). This makes it almost trivial to use any fields of the resource (pagetitle, longtitle, createdon, publishedon, editedby, publishedby, etc.) and any fields of the user or user profile objects (username, fullname, email, phone, address, zip, etc.).

In addition, you can put arguments (called properties) in the snippet tag and these will also be available in the snippet. The properties can use MODX tags for the argument values so you can send other MODX objects along in the snippet call and make to make them available in the snippet.

Here is a simple MODX template. The MODX tags are all enclosed with [[tag]] The tag types are as follows:

Snippet tag: [[SnippetName]]
Chunk tag: [[$ChunkName]]
System Setting Tag: [[++SettingName]]
Resource Field/Template Variable tag: [[*fieldName/TvName]]
Link tag: [[~PageId]]
Placeholder tag: [[+PlaceholderName]]
Tags can be nested and if any tag begins with the "!" token, the tag content will be uncached.

Example MODX Template


     <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0
        Transitional//EN"
        "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-
        transitional.dtd">
     <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
     <head>
     <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;
        charset=[[++modx_charset]]" />
     <meta name="copyright" content="2011, MODX" />
     <title>[[++site_name]] | [[*pagetitle]]</title>
     <link href="[[++base_url]]assets/site/simple.css" rel="stylesheet"
        type="text/css" />
     </head>
     <body>
        <div id="header">
            <div id="logo">
                [[*longtitle]]
            </div>
        </div>
        <div id="main">
            [[*content]]
        </div>
        <div id="sidebar">
            [[$SideBar]]
        </div>
        <div id="navigation">
            [[Wayfinder? &startId=`0`]]
        </div>
        <div id="news">
            [[!getResources? &parents=`22` &tpl=`MyGrTpl`]]
        </div>
        <p><a href="[[~[[*id]]]]#" >Back to Top</a></p>
        <p><a href="[[~[[++site_start]]]]" >MODX Home
            Page</a></p>
        <div id="footer">
            [[$Footer]]
        </div>
     </body>
     </html>
